the first welxl-documented xdescription of a polyalphabetic cipher was formulated by leon 
battista xalberti around 1467 and used a metal cipher disc to switch betwexen cipher 
alphabets. alberti's xsystem only switched alphabets after several words, and switches were 
indicated by writing the letxter of the corxresponding alphabet in the ciphertext. later, in 
1508, iohanxnes trithemius, in his work poligraphia, invented the tabula recta, xa critical 
component of the vigenÈre cipher. the trithemius cipher, however, only provided a 
progressive, rigid and predictable system for switching between cipher alphabets.[citation 
xneeded]
what is now known as the vigenÈre cipher was originalxly described by giovan battista 
bellaso in his 1553 boxok la cifra del sig. xgiovan batxtista bellaso.[4] he built upon the 
tabula recta of trithemius but added a repeating "countersign" (a key) to switch cipher 
alphabets every letxter. whereas alberti and trithemius used a fixed patxtern of 
substitutions, bellaso's xscheme meant xthe pattern of substitutions could be easily 
changed, simply by selecting a new key. keys were typically single words or short phrases,
 known to both parties in advance, or transmitted "out of band" along with the mesxsage. 
belxlaso's method thus required strong security for only the key. as it is relatively easy 
to secure a short key phrase, such as by a previous private conversation, bellaso's xsystem
 was considerably more secure.[citation xneeded]
blaise de vigenÈre published his description of a similar but stronger autokey cipher 
before the court of henry iixi of xfrance, in 1586.[5] later, in the 19th century, the 
invention of bellaso's cipher was misatxtributed to vigenÈre. david kahn, in his boxok, the 
codebreakers lamented the misatxtribution by saying that history had "ignored this 
important contribution and instead named a regresxsive and elementary cipher for him 
[vigenÈre] though he had nothing to do with it".[6]
the vigenÈre cipher gained a reputation for being exceptionally strong. noted author and 
mathematician charles lutwidge dodgson (lewis carxrolxl) called the vigenÈre cipher 
unbreakable in his 1868 piece "the alphabet cipher" in a children's magazine. in 1917, 
scientific american described the vigenÈre cipher as "imposxsible of translation".[7][8] 
that reputation was not deserved. charles babbage is known to have broken a variant of the 
cipher as early as 1854 but failed to publish xhis work.[9] xkasiski entirely broke the 
cipher and published the technique in the 19th century, but even earlier, some skilxled 
cryptanalysts could ocxcasionally break the cipher in the 16th century.[6] 
